---
title: 2025 年 8 月文摘
date: 2025-08-01
category: reading
draft: true
---

## [Slow](https://michaelnotebook.com/slow/index.html)

> What problems can human beings only solve over a very long period of time? And how can we build institutions that solve those problems?

## [Reflections on Palantir](https://nabeelqu.substack.com/p/reflections-on-palantir) ⭐

> If you wanted to work on these ‘harder’ areas of the economy but also wanted a Silicon Valley work culture, Palantir was basically your only option for awhile.

> In general, as I begin to survey more startups, I find that the talent level at PayPal is not uncommon for a Silicon Valley startup, but the differentiating factor may have been the level of intensity from the top: both Peter Thiel and Max Levchin were extremely intense people - hyper-competitive, hard-working, and unwilling to accept defeat. I think this sort of leadership is what pushes the "standard" talented team to be able to do great things and, subsequently, contributes to producing a wellspring of later achievements.

> Palantir was an unusually intense and weird place. I remember my first time I talked to Stephen Cohen he had the A/C in his office set at 60, several weird-looking devices for minimizing CO2 content in the room, and had a giant pile of ice in a cup.

> I like to meet candidates with no data about them: no résumé, no preliminary discussions or job description, just the candidate and me in a room. I ask a fairly random question, one that is orthogonal to anything they would be doing at Palantir. I then watch how they disaggregate the question, if they appreciate how many different ways there are to see the same thing. I like to keep interviews short, about 10 minutes. Otherwise, people move into their learned responses and you don’t get a sense of who they really are.

> many people have copied the ‘hardcore’ working culture and the ‘this is the Marines’ vibe, but few have the intellectual atmosphere, the sense of being involved in a rich set of ideas. This is hard to LARP - your founders and early employees have to be genuinely interesting intellectual thinkers.

> When I joined, Palantir was divided up into two types of engineers:
>
> Engineers who work with customers, sometimes known as FDEs, forward deployed engineers.
>
> Engineers who work on the core product team (product development - PD), and rarely go visit customers.
>
> ...
> This made the software hard to describe concisely - it wasn’t just a database or a spreadsheet, it was an end-to-end solution to that specific problem, and to hell with generalizability. Your job was to solve the problem, and not worry about overfitting; PD’s job was to take whatever you’d built and generalize it, with the goal of selling it elsewhere.
> ...
> FDEs tend to write code that gets the job done fast, which usually means – politely – technical debt and hacky workarounds. PD engineers write software that scales cleanly, works for multiple use cases, and doesn’t break. One of the key ‘secrets’ of the company is that generating deep, sustaining enterprise value requires both.

> Tyler Cowen has a wonderful saying, ‘context is that which is scarce’, and you could say it’s the foundational insight of this model.

> Why is data integration so hard? The data is often in different formats that aren’t easily analyzed by computers – PDFs, notebooks, Excel files (my god, so many Excel files) and so on. But often what really gets in the way is organizational politics: a team, or group, controls a key data source, the reason for their existence is that they are the gatekeepers to that data source, and they typically justify their existence in a corporation by being the gatekeepers of that data source (and, often, providing analyses of that data).

> The overall ‘vibe’ of the company was more of a messianic cult than a normal software company. But importantly, it seemed that criticism was highly tolerated and welcomed – one person showed me an email chain where an entry-level software engineer was having an open, contentious argument with a Director of the company with the entire company (around a thousand people) cc’d. As a rationalist-brained philosophy graduate, this particular point was deeply important to me – I wasn’t interested in joining an uncritical cult. But a cult of skeptical people who cared deeply and wanted to argue about where the world was going and how software fit into it – existentially – that was interesting to me.

> I’m not sure if they still do this, but at the time when you joined they sent you a copy of Impro, The Looming Tower (9/11 book), Interviewing Users, and Getting Things Done. I also got an early PDF version of what became Ray Dalio’s Principles.
> ...
> But why Impro?
> ...
> Impro is popular with nerds partly because it breaks down social behavior mechanistically.

> One of my favorite insights from Tyler Cowen’s book ‘Talent’ is that the most talented people tend to develop their own vocabularies and memes, and these serve as entry points to a whole intellectual world constructed by that person. Tyler himself is of course a great example of this. Any MR reader can name 10+ Tylerisms instantly - ‘model this’, ‘context is that which is scarce’, ‘solve for the equilibrium’, ‘the great stagnation’ are all examples. You can find others who are great at this. Thiel is one. Elon is another (“multiplanetary species”, “preserving the light of consciousness”, etc. are all memes). Trump, Yudkowsky, gwern, SSC, Paul Graham, all of them regularly coin memes. It turns out that this is a good proxy for impact.
>
> This insight goes for companies, too, and Palantir had its own, vast set of terms, some of which are obscure enough that “what does Palantir actually do?” became a meme online. ‘Ontology’ is an old one, but then there is ‘impl’, ‘artist’s colony’, ‘compounding’, ‘the 36 chambers’, ‘dots’, ‘metabolizing pain’, ‘gamma radiation’, and so on. The point isn’t to explain all of these terms, each of which compresses a whole set of rich insights; it’s that when you’re looking for companies to join, you could do worse than look for a rich internal language or vocabulary that helps you think about things in a more interesting way.

> One of the things that (I think) came from Peter was the idea of not giving people titles. When I was there, everyone had the “forward deployed engineer” title, more or less, and apart from that there were five or six Directors and the CEO. Occasionally someone would make up a different title (one guy I know called himself “Head of Special Situations”, which I thought was hilarious) but these never really caught on. It’s straightforward to trace this back to Peter’s Girardian beliefs: if you create titles, people start coveting them, and this ends up creating competitive politics inside the company that undermines internal unity. Better to just give everyone the same title and make them go focus on the goal instead.

> Some people were more influential than others, but the influence was usually based on some impressive accomplishment, and most importantly nobody could tell anyone else what to do. So it didn’t matter if somebody was influential or thought your idea was dumb, you could ignore them and go build something if you thought it was the right thing to do.

> The cost of this was that the company often felt like there was no clear strategy or direction, more like a Petri dish of smart people building little fiefdoms and going off in random directions. But it was incredibly generative.

> This is an uncomfortable stance for many, precisely because you’re not guaranteed to be doing 100% good at all times. You’re at the mercy of history, in some ways, and you’re betting that (a) more good is being done than bad (b) being in the room is better than not. This was good enough for me. Others preferred to go elsewhere.

## [Palantir Foundry](https://www.palantir.com/platforms/foundry/)

## [“Context is that which is scarce”](https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/02/context-is-that-which-is-scarce-2.html)

> When judging people for leadership positions, or for jobs that require strongly synthetic abilities, you should consider how well they are capable of generating an understanding of context across a broad range of domains, including ex nihilo, so to speak.  How to test for understanding of context is itself a topic we could consider in more depth.

## [Lessons from Peter Thiel](https://www.8vc.com/resources/lessons-from-peter-thiel)

> In hiring, value intelligence highly.

> If you are designing something that a customer is going to use or that will represent us in public, it’s not good enough unless it’s flawless and extraordinary.

> Don’t waste time talking about what you plan to think about; instead, work through it immediately.

> So we have to use our judgment to seek out intelligent people who disagree with us — or even intelligent people who have simply taken a different approach — and be open about what we might learn from them.

> In the abstract, this is because the incentives of the other company will not line up with ours, and even if they do for the moment, they no longer will once the situation changes. In specific, other companies don’t have the same culture of execution that Palantir does, and we don’t have the power to instill that culture in them.

> Instead, it’s often instructive to imagine that you were working from a clean slate and design the feature from scratch.

## [You don’t need a niche, you need a point of view](https://thedankoe.com/letters/you-dont-need-a-niche-you-need-a-point-of-view/)

> When you shift from being a repository of specialized knowledge to being a lens through which people see the world, you become a curator of many ideas across different domains and synthesize them under one body of work. You no longer own a category or topic, you own a perspective that creates a unique constellation of interconnected ideas that can’t be replicated because they’re filtered through your specific combination of values, experiences, and goals.

## [CS183: Startup - Peter Thiel Class Notes](https://blakemasters.tumblr.com/)

> We tend to think of all computers as more or less identical. Maybe some features are different, but the systems are mostly homogeneous. People, by contrast, are very different from one another. We look at the wide range of human characteristics—from empathy to cruelty, kindness to sociopathy—and perceive people to be quite diverse. Since people run our legal system, this heterogeneity translates into a wide range of outcomes in disputes. After all, if people are all different, it may matter a great deal who is the judge, jury, or prosecutor in your case. The converse of this super naive intuition is that, since all computers are the same, an automized legal system would be one in which you get the same answer in all sorts of different contexts.

